---
layout: post
title: Useful Flask tips 
---

For the third project in Metis' Data Science
program, I used the [Correlates of
War](http://www.correlatesofwar.org) data set to build a Random Forest
classifier that predicts whether a conflict between two nations will
turn violent. To make it interesting, I built a front-end application
using Flask and d3.js.

The Correlates of War project has collected a lot of fascinating
information about military conflict, and it was interesting to explore
the data and think about how to use it to predict which disputes turn
violent.

I won't go into the data exploration, feature extraction or modeling
here. That's all covered pretty well in the Jupyter notebook in my
[GitHib repo](http://github.com/dextersealy/metis-proj3). Here I'll
share a few tips I learned from building the Flask app (in the GitHub
repo's **app** sub-folder).

### One function to route them all ###

With Flask you use the <b>```route()```</b> decorator to tell it what
to do with a URL. The typical "Hello World!" Flask application looks
like this:

```python
import flask
app = flask.Flask(__name__)
@app.route('/')
def hello_world():
    return 'Hello, World!'

```

Here ```hello_world()``` returns a string to display in
the browser, but you'll usually want to return an HTML page stored in
a separate file. For example,

```python
import flask
app = flask.Flask(__name__)
@app.route("/")
def home_page():
    """
    Return app's home page.
    """
    with open("index.html", 'r') as input:
        return input.read()
```

You can simplify this further by using Flask's
```send_from_directory()``` method, to handle reading the file.
For example,


```python
import flask
app = flask.Flask(__name__)
@app.route("/")
def home_page():
	return flask.send_from_directory('.', 'index.html')
```

But, what do you do when your app is composed of multiple URLs, with
multiple files in different sub-directories? You could build
```route()``` functions for all of them, but there's a quicker and
easier way.

Using the *path* placeholder and two ```route()```
decorators, one function can route all your page requests. Mine looks
like this:

```python
@app.route('/', defaults={'path': 'MID_predictor.html'})
@app.route('/<path:path>')
def send_js(path):
    return flask.send_from_directory('.', path)
```

The app returns ```MID_predictor.html``` for the root path ```'/'```
and searches the local file system for everything else. When my HTML
page requests, ```data/world-topo-min.json```, Flask finds the file in
the ```data``` sub-folder.

I found this trick helpful because I could add, remove and move files
around without having to change the Python code. If you're concerned
about security, you'll be glad to know Flask doesn't allow you to use
<b>```'..'```</b> to access files outside the application folder.

### Debug mode ###

There are several ways to run a Flask application. You can use the
<b>flask</b> command, Python's ```-m``` switch, or Flask's <b>run</b>
command. Regardless of how you run it, you must stop and restart the
server whenever you change your code.

If you enable Flask's debug mode, it will automatically incorporate
changes to Python code files, without you having to stop and restart
the server. To enable Debug mode, export the ```FLASK_DEBUG```
environment variable, or pass ```debug=True``` to the Flask <b>run</b>
command.

Debug mode includes an interactive debugger that can execute arbitrary
code from the browser, so remember to disable it when you've finished
testing your application.

I used a command line switch to control whether the app runs in debug
mode. For example,


```python
import getopt
import sys
def main(argv):
    try:
        opts, args = getopt.getopt(argv, 'd', ['debug'])
    except getopt.GetoptError:
        sys.exit(2)

    debug = False
    for opt, arg in opts:
        if opt in ['-d', '--debug']:
            debug = True

    app.run(host='0.0.0.0', debug=debug)


if __name__ == '__main__':
    main(sys.argv[1:])
```
