---
layout: post
title: Using linear regression to predict movie box office gross
---

The second project in Metis' Data Science program is an exercise in
using Linear Regression to either interpret or make predictions with
data. I chose to use movie data to predict the world-wide box office
gross using only information available before a movie is released.

**Sidebar**: Actually, I originally wanted to predict which movies would be
profitable, but after struggling with that problem for a few days,
the Metis TA shared that it was known to be intractable. Many former
Metis students had tired and failed to do the same. Beware.

I split the project into two parts, as reflected by the two notebooks
in my [git repository](http://github.com/dextersealy/metis-proj2-luther): 
web scraping, and modeling.

### Web scraping ###

After exploring several available data sources, I settled on using
[boxofficemojo.com](http://www.boxofficemojo.com) as my main source
for information on movies released in the past five years.

I used Beautiful Soup to get the data, and it was straight-forward. To
avoid downloading the same pages multiple times, I wrote a simple web
page cache that I shared with my classmates and was the subject of
another [blog entry](http://www.dextersealy.com/Caching_web_pages).

More problematic than the actual scraping, was filling holes in the
data. I learned fairly quickly that boxofficemojo.com lacks budget
numbers for most of the movies in their database. So, I scraped
[the-numbers.com](http://www.the-numbers.com) and
[IMDB.com](http://www.imdb.com) to supplement that information and was
eventually able to get budget estimates for one-third of the movies.
   
Another interesting aspect of the scraping process was the logic I
used to get the average box office of a movie's actors, directors,
producers, writers and composers to generate a 'score' I could use as
a feature in the model. The alternative would have been to add
hundreds, if not thousands, of dummy variables and I didn't think that
would be practical.

It worked best for me to cleanly separate scraping from modeling so I
could make adjustments to one without affecting the other, so at the
end of the scraping notebook, I save the data to a CSV file that the
other notebook can import. 

### Modeling ###

As the goal of this project was to using linear regression, and as I'm
a person who likes to understand how things work, I used
statsmodels.OLS to build my model. I could have used the formula API,
but I felt it too much of a black box that prevented me from seeing
"inside" the model.

Surprisingly, my model worked quite well on the first try. The first
time I fit the model to my data, I got an adjusted R-squared close to
0.8. My first thought was that my model was over-fit, but that turned
not to be the case.

It's obvious in retrospect, but the best indicators of how well a movie
will do in the box office are the budget, and the box office appeal of
the people involved in the project. The model I created used just
seven features: budget, MPAA rating, genre, and the five box office
'scores' I assigned to the actors, directors, producers and writers.

In the model there's one cumulative score for the actors,
director(s), etc., that is the sum of each person's average box office
gross. In the model Ryan Gosling, for example, gets a higher score as
an actor than as a director, because the films he directed did not do
as well as the films in which he acted.

This score effectively captured how well each person's movies had done
in the past, and also the case where the same people reappear together
in a franchise.

Though I'm pleased with how well the scoring system worked, I realize
it has a major flaw. The simple model I built assigns each person a
single score, where a more accurate model would assign different
scores at different times in a person's career.

Specifically, the score for an appearance in a movie should be the
average gross *before* it was released. Cult films aside, it's
nonsensical to say a movie does well because of another movie a
cast member worked on after.

That aside, the project served well as a way to study web scraping and
linear regression.

